
Since the birth of mankind, humans have been looking at the stars and wondering about the mysteries of the cosmos. In early age, people followed the movement of stars and established their own beliefs. It was not until the era of Galileo, people realized that there were other planets in our solar system too. The religious tyranny of those days surely didn't like the way the science of astronomy was advancing, but those curious humans whom we today know as early day astronomers tried to answer their own queries by inventing and using tools of mathematics and physics. Early astronomers thought universe was only confined to our own galaxy, but slowly they realized that our milky way was just a dot in the cosmos. It was only in the early 21st century that the Big Bang theory which describes the origin of universe, around 13 billion years ago, was proved. Today we have technology to see other planets, photograph star systems and observe the beauty of creation of nature and cosmos.

          How big is the universe? It’s a question in lot of young minds today who are interested in knowing the cosmos. I think it would be ok if i say whatever part of the universe we know today, is almost like taking a glass of water from a giant ocean. Travelling to other planets and stars is still like a fantasy for us. The farthest manned mission has gone is to the moon which is our own planet’s satellite 450,000 miles away. The farthest manmade instrument has travelled is the Voyager spacecraft that was launched 37 years ago which today has reached outside our solar system to interstellar space. Scientist estimate that with its current speed(which is almost 11 miles/s), it will take another 50,000-60,000 years to reach our nearest star system which is about 4 light years away from earth and is inside our galaxy. Our galactic centre is estimated to be about 25000 light years away. And we know our galaxy is just one among the billions in our universe. So this can provide a clear picture of how big the universe is.

          While we are discussing about the universe, the term space-time and gravity always comes associated with it. It was Sir Issac Newton who coined the term gravity. He defined it as some kind of force that was pulling us towards the earth surface and he concluded that every planetary body or star has the same force, hence to keep the universe in balance. His theory was correct to a certain extent but it had lot of unexplained anomalies. And it was not solved until Albert Einstein defined gravity in a totally different way. Einstein concluded that space and time were not different entities but were interlinked. He defined that with the existence of space began time. He also concluded that space-time fabric could be bent and every planetary body like sun, planet including ours and satellites were bending the space-time fabric according to their strength and keeping the body revolving around them in perfect orbit. His theory on gravity and his definition of space time fabric became the foundation of today's space missions and space technology. Einstein’s Theory of relativity opened a totally new secret of space travel. It states that if we travel in high speed in space then we would be meddling with  time. Assuming our clock aboard our vehicle and another on the ground has been set for same time, then after the space travel we would find that our clock has been slowed down by certain factors than the ground's clock. So the more we travel at high velocity in space, the more our clock would delay, ie we would travel ahead in time or travel to the future. And at the speed of light, which is today's defined cosmic limit, we would feel that the clock aboard our vehicle has stopped moving or the time has stopped for us while it’s continuing for the rest of the world. The long mystery of time travel was also solved by this theory, but it has not been achieved yet because we have not been able to develop and use propulsion systems other than chemical propulsion. Research is actively being carried out on other forms of propulsion systems like thermo-nuclear propulsion, antimatter propulsion, hydrogen propulsion, etc.


          Initialization of space missions began back in the 1950s. The successful manned mission to the moon, rover missions to mars, lander on venus, orbiters on Venus, Saturn etc has been some of the achievements mankind has completed in these 60 years. The International Space Station is also another major achievement for conducting research about effect of space on biology of humans and living organisms. Considering the vastness of the cosmos, we have just taken our first step in a long endless road. There’s still much more to explore, much more to observe and much more to learn. But at current our knowledge about the cosmos is still in its infant stage and our vision of travelling to stars and galaxies is still just a fantasy.

